Unified Mode Working Branch (#3111)
chef/chef-web-docs: themes/docs-new/layouts/shortcodes/unified_mode.md

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->
Unified Mode combines the compile and converge stages of the Chef Infra Client run into one phase. Unified mode means that the Chef Infra Client compiles and applies a custom resource in order, from top to bottom. The impact of Unified Mode is limited to the individual custom resource--other resources or recipes remain unchanged. Enable Unified Mode by setting `unified_mode true` on a custom resource. Left unset, the behavior defaults to `unified_mode false`, which means that the custom resource will continue to work as it has in the past (using separate Chef Infra Client run compile and converge stages), with an additional deprecation message warning that those resources should be converted.

Unified Mode is required for custom resources in Chef Infra Client 17.0 and higher.
Unified Mode is available for custom resources in Chef Infra Client 15.3.
Unified Mode is **NOT** available for custom resources in Chef Infra Client 15.0.

> Unified Mode is available for custom resources in Chef Infra Client 14.14.

Reviewer: Is there a version of Chef 16 that it isn't available for too? (Was it 16.0?)

Reviewer 2: This list needs some work. 15.3+ have support for unified_mode and 17+ recommend you set it true, 18+ will default to true

Author: We're going to need a table for this.

Author: You can see the table at https://609adb81b36c7a0007cdfab8--chef-web-docs.netlify.app/unified_mode/

I'll apply different formatting later, but is the content OK?

> <!-- markdownlint-disable MD041 -->

Reviewer 3: MD041 shouldn't be set on any of our docs so this is a bit redundant.
```suggestion
```

Unified mode combines the compile and converge stages of the Chef Infra Client run into one phase. In unified mode, Chef Infra Client compiles and converges a custom resource in one pass and in the order that the code is compiled, from the beginning to the end.

Unified mode is only available on custom resources. Chef Infra Client processes all other resources with separate compile and converge phases.

> In Chef Infra Client 17.x and some earlier versions, the default behavior is `unified_mode false`. Enable unified mode on a custom resource with `unified_mode true`. Chef Infra Client displays a deprecation message with `unified_mode false`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Chef Infra Client 17 (April 2021) and some earlier versions, the default behavior is `unified_mode false`. Enable unified mode on a custom resource with `unified_mode true`. Chef Infra Client displays a deprecation message with `unified_mode false`.
```

> In Chef Infra Client 18.x, `unified_mode true` will become the default behavior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Chef Infra Client 18 (April 2022), `unified_mode true` will become the default behavior.
```

|Chef Infra Client  | Unified Mode                 |
|-------------------|-----------------------------|
| 18.x (2022)       | Default: `unified_mode true` |

> | 17.x              | Default: `unified_mode false`|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 17.x (2021)              | Default: `unified_mode false`|
```

> | 16.x              | Default: `unified_mode false`|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| 16.x (2020)              | Default: `unified_mode false`|
```

| 15.3 and higher   | Default: `unified_mode false`|
| 15.0–15.2        | Not available               |
| 14.14 and higher  | Default: `unified_mode false`|
| Lower than 14.14  | Not available               |

## Enable Unified Mode

> Enable unified mode by adding the `unified_mode true` in the resource declaration. You can upgrade most custom resources to use unified mode without additional work other than testing and validation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable unified mode by adding the `unified_mode true` in the custom resource. You can upgrade most custom resources to use unified mode without additional work other than testing and validation.
```

```ruby
# enable unified mode
unified_mode true

provides :myresource

actions :run do
  [...]
end

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

```

## Troubleshoot Unified Mode

> Unified mode changes the execution of a custom resource to run in one phase, in the order that the code is written, from first line of the code to the last. Custom resources designed to use two phases may need modification. These fall into three general types:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unified mode changes the execution of a custom resource to run in one phase, in the order that the code is written, from the first line of the code to the last. Custom resources designed to use two phases may need modification. These fall into three general types:
```

- Resources with changes to internal sub-resources
- Resources with actions on later resources
- Resources that rely on the out-of-order execution

When designing a custom resource for unified mode:

- Declare a resource first and then declare actions on it
- Write resources in run-time order

> ### Resources with Changes to Internal Sub-resources

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Resources With Changes to Internal Sub-Resources
```

Author: It looks strange, but that's correct for Chicago. In AP we'd capitalize `With` but not `resources`.
We should look into the Hugo title-case feature. I tried it once & couldn't get it to work.

> Some resources are designed to create and edit other sub-resources as part of the resource declaration. In unified mode, the Chef Infra Client parses a resource codeblock that creates or edits a sub-resource and immediately and tries to apply that change, even though the sub-resource does not yet exist. This results in the execution of an incomplete resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some custom resources are designed to create and edit other sub-resources as part of the resource declaration. In unified mode, the Chef Infra Client parses a resource code block that creates or edits a sub-resource and immediately and tries to apply that change, even though the sub-resource does not yet exist. This results in the execution of an incomplete resource.
```

> Some custom resources are designed to create and edit other sub-resources as part of the resource declaration. In unified mode, the Chef Infra Client parses a resource code block that creates or edits a sub-resource and immediately and tries to apply that change, even though the sub-resource does not yet exist. This results in the execution of an incomplete resource.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some custom resources are designed to create and edit other sub-resources as part of the resource declaration. In unified mode, the Chef Infra Client parses a resource code block that creates or edits a sub-resource and immediately tries to apply that change, even though the sub-resource does not yet exist. This results in the execution of an incomplete resource.
```

> For example, with unified mode enabled, this code from the _dhcp cookbook_ is designed to create and edit a shared `dhcp_subnet` resource does not work as expected:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, with unified mode enabled, this code from the _dhcp cookbook_ is designed to create and edit a shared `dhcp_subnet` resource, but it will not work as expected:
```

```ruby
# 'edit_resource' results in an incomple subresource
sr = edit_resource(:dhcp_subnet, "#{new_resource.name}_sharedsubnet_#{subnet}") do
  owner new_resource.owner
  group new_resource.group
  mode new_resource.mode

  ip_version new_resource.ip_version
  conf_dir new_resource.conf_dir
  shared_network true
end

properties.each do |property, value|
  sr.send(property, value)
end
```

> To fix resources that change sub-resources during their declaration, you can:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To correct custom resources that change sub-resources during their declaration, you can:
```

> - Apply properties in the codeblock (preferred)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Apply properties in the code block (preferred)
```

- Run the resource explicitly (not preferred)

> #### Apply Properties in the Codeblock

Author: ```suggestion
#### Apply Properties in the Code Block
```

> This pattern declares the sub-resource in one codeblock and then changes it in the next codeblock. This is the preferred pattern in unified mode because all resources execute in order at compile time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This pattern declares the sub-resource in one code block and then changes it in the next code block. This is the preferred pattern in unified mode because all resources execute in order at compile time.
```

```ruby
dhcp_subnet "#{new_resource.name}_sharedsubnet_#{subnet}" do
  owner new_resource.owner
  group new_resource.group
  mode new_resource.mode

  ip_version new_resource.ip_version
  conf_dir new_resource.conf_dir
  shared_network true

  properties.each do |property, value|
    send(property, value)
  end
end
```

#### Run the Resource Explicitly

Another solution is to continue saving the resource as a variable, declaring `action :nothing` within the codeblock and then explicitly running the action in another codeblock.

> The pattern of saving a resource as a variable and then forcing it to run at compile time with an explicit `run_action` works as it has in the past, but it not a preferred pattern. Unified mode forces resource execution to compile time by default, which makes this pattern redundant.

Reviewer 3: This feels a bit clunky.

I might be getting this wrong, but this:

```
Unified mode forces resources to execute at compile time by default, which makes this pattern redundant.`
```

Or maybe:

```
Unified mode forces resource execution at compile time by default, which makes this pattern redundant.
```

```ruby
sr = edit_resource(:dhcp_subnet, "#{new_resource.name}_sharedsubnet_#{subnet}") do
  owner new_resource.owner
  group new_resource.group
  mode new_resource.mode

  ip_version new_resource.ip_version
  conf_dir new_resource.conf_dir
  shared_network true

  action :nothing
end

properties.each do |property, value|
  sr.send(property, value)
end

# Run the action explicitly
sr.run_action(:create)
```

## Actions on Later Resources

> Since unified mode executes your resource as it is compiled, you cannot send immediate notifications to resources declared later.

Reviewer 4: But you can send immediate notification to resources declared later.

```suggestion
Since unified mode executes your resource as it is compiled, the behavior of immediate notifications to resources declared later is different.
```

> Since unified mode executes your resource as it is compiled, the behavior of immediate notifications to resources declared later is different.

Reviewer 3: That feels clunky too.

```suggestion
Since unified mode executes your resource as it is compiled, `:immediate` notifications that execute later resources are handled differently than in the past.
```

I don't know if that's a very good suggestion, but it might be better 🤷

### `:immediate` Notifications to Later Resources

Unified mode delays immediate notifications to later resources.
In unified mode the Chef Infra Client saves immediate notifications and executes them when the later resource is parsed. Immediate notifications to prior resources and delayed notifications behave the same as they did before unified mode.

> Chaining immediate notifications results in the same behavior as before unified mode. Changing the order of resources results does not change the results of a notification chain. Chained notifications in the same order during the Chef Infra Client run and immediately sends a notification to a target resource that was parsed earlier and saves a notification and sends it immediately after it parses a later resource.

Reviewer 4: I think the meaning of the second sentence got a bit mangled somewhere and the whole thing is a bit awkward to read.

```suggestion
The end result of chaining immediate notifications is the same as before unified mode.  Instead of immediately notifying results, the notifications fire sequentially as they are parsed, which has the same outcome.  If the parse order and the intended execution order are very different, the results may be different and reflect parse order.
```

My second sentence clearly needs work there.

The changes to sending immediate notification could result in subtle changes to behaviors in some resources, but it not a breaking change to common patterns of writing resources.

Chaining immediate notifications to later resources:

```ruby
remote_file "#{Chef::Config[:file_cache_path]}/myservice.tgz" do
  source "http://acme.com/myservice.tgz"
  notifies :extract, "archive_file[myservice.tgz]", :immediately
end

archive_file "#{Chef::Config[:file_cache_path]}/myservice.tgz" do
  destination '/srv/myservice'
  notifies :start, "service[myservice]", :immediately
  action :nothing
end

service "myservice" do
  action :nothing
end
```

### `:before` Notifications to Later Resources

> Unified mode breaks resources with `before` notifications to later resources. In unified mode, you must declare a resource before you can act on it.

Reviewer 4: > In unified mode, you must declare a resource before you can act on it.

That's sort of incorrect, you can send delayed notifications to it fine, you can send immediate notifications to it with qualifications, but you just can't do anything with a before notification.

I'm not sure I can rephrase in any way that isn't just redundant with the prior sentence.

```suggestion
In unified mode, you must declare a resource before sending a `before` notification to it.
```

Resources that subscribe to a `before` notification to a later resource must be declared after the resource that triggers the notification.

> This resource declares `before` notification to a later resource and will no longer work:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This resource declares a `before` notification to a later resource and will no longer work:
```

```ruby
package "myservice" do
  notifies :stop, "service[myservice]", :before
  notifies :start, "service[myservice]", :immediately
end

service "myservice" do
  action :nothing
end
```

Instead, declare the resource and then declare actions. For example:

```ruby
service "myservice" do
  action :nothing
end

package "myservice" do
  notifies :stop, "service[myservice]", :before
  notifies :start, "service[myservice]", :immediately
end
```

> ### Out Of Order Execution

Author: ```suggestion
### Out of Order Execution
```

> Unified mode  break custom resources that rely on the out-of-order execution of compile-time statements. Move any affected compile-time statements to the location in the code where they are intended to execute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unified mode breaks custom resources that rely on the out-of-order execution of compile-time statements. Move any affected compile-time statements to the location in the code where they are intended to execute.
```

> Out-of-order execution is rare. At Chef, none of our custom resources broke during our conversion custom resources to unified mode. Instead, we discovered a few cases in which custom resource code was intended run in order, but Chef Infra Client executed it out of order. In these cases, unified mode fixed errors instead of introducing bugs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Out-of-order execution is rare. Internally at Chef, none of our custom resources broke during our migration to unified mode. Instead, we discovered a few cases in which custom resource code was intended to run in order, but Chef Infra Client executed it out of order. In these cases, unified mode fixed errors instead of introducing bugs.
```
